Let us look at some simple commands. So, that
we can use in the Linux command line environment,
we will make ourselves familiar with the command
line environment by trying out some simple
commands and these are not going to change
the system in any manner and therefore you
can try this out without anybody.
The commands that we are going to look at
are the following to know the date and time
at this moment. The calendar of this month
some statistics about the memory that is available
which groups does the current user belong
to in the directory listing that we are seeing
in our home directory what type of file each
entry corresponds to.
Now let us explore some of these commands
by using the command line environment. So,
we are using the terminal emulator called
terminal in Ubuntu and the bash shell is what
is actually responding to our commands. So,
where are we first we are in the home directory
will verify that we are in the home directory
and we could then change the directory using
the shortcuts. So, we use the shortcut double
dot to go to the parent directory and we can
do that once more to go to the root folder.
And then we can go down the hierarchy let
us say to user and then to bin directory.
Now from here we can go back to the home directory
by simply pressing cd and then enter and let
us say we want to go and visit the directory
again we do not have to type user bin we can
just say cd and then a hyphen to indicate
the previous directory we were in and we will
be placed in the previous directory that we
were working in.
Sometimes if the directory names are very
long this could be quite useful. And when
we proceed we come to the home directory and
as you would notice if you press cd space
dot then nothing will happen because that
is like changing the directly to the current
directory which does not change anything.
Now wherever we are let us say we go to user
bin we could go to the home directory in multiple
ways.
There is a shortcut tilda which also will
take you to the home directory. So, you verify
that you are in the home directory. So, there
are some characters that are actually indicating
that there are aliases for certain directory
entries for example dot is for the current
directory uh double dot is for the parent
directory and the tilde is for the home directory
and dash is for the directory that we were
in the previous command.
So, I press now control l and clear the screen.
Now we will have some useful commands to look
at. Let us look at a command called date it
tells what is a current time stamp for this
moment. So, if you run it again and again
you will see that the second position number
is changing. Now obviously this time need
not be accurate because it depends upon what
you have configured and you can also change
it. ah
We will learn how to do that at some point
later. We could also have the output of the
date command in multiple manners. So, if you
give it in with a comment option -capital
R it would give you the command output in
the format called uh rfc 5322 standard. This
is a standard that is used for email communications
and uh if you want you could also uh display
the uh output in many other formats.
How do we find out what are the various ways?
So, we take the man manual page of a data
command and look at that and here you have
some help to tell you which fields correspond
to which part of the daytime stamp and then
you can configure that to print the date ah
in any matter that you would like. So, I come
out of this help by pressing q. Now you could
also have more information um I would clear
the screen and you could actually just type
cal and you would see the calendar for the
current month.
You could also uh use this command to find
out the calendar of any month. Let us say
uh for the august uh month of 1947 let us
look at the calendar and it shows that uh
we began uh our independent India on Friday.
And you could also give the month in other
formats. So, it would give you with the same
output you could also perhaps use uh a capital
letter for the August and that would also
still work.
So, this is a pretty quick way of checking
the calendar of any month of any year and
you may want to find out which day of the
week we were born in using this command. Now
you could also display the calendar in other
formats. So, you have the direction change
now ncal would be a command which would give
you calendar uh in a different orientation
which may be more useful for you depending
upon the way you are used to looking at the
calendar for maths.
And the options would still work the same
way ncal and then let us say august uh 1947
even if it would show you the calendar uh
for that month in the different uh display
orientation. There are some more commands
that you would be interested to run to just
to check the statistics about the machine
and that there is a command called free and
this shows what is the amount of memory that
is available for free uh in this computer
right now and you can see that these uh numbers
are not very readable.
So, we would actually type free and then hyphen
hedge as an option to make it human readable
and you would see that there is uh uh that
the total memory of this particular computer
is 31 gigabytes and out of that only 1.2 gigabytes
is used 26 gigabytes is free. So, so we are
now not running very much. So, most of the
memory is free. And there is something called
swap memory which is basically used whenever
the physical memory is exceeded by the number
of programs that are running.
And one can also look at whether that is being
occupied and you see that we are not occupying
anything in this swap memory which is a good
thing because uh most of the uh usage uh if
it is a in the physical memory then it will
be fast and if there is any requirement to
use a swap memory then it would be drastically
slow because swap memory is actually stored
on the disk and the disk is much slower than
the actual physical memory also referred to
as random access memory.
There is a command called groups if you run
you would see what are the groups to which
you belong to, the current user is belonging
to. So, this current user is belonging to
a group called sudo which means that the current
user is also a super user. And this can be
changed by adding ourselves to more groups.
So, there is a group by the same name as a
user which is also to ensure that there is
a privacy with the certain files that nobody
else can actually use. In this computer there
are not many users and therefore there are
not many groups either.
Now let us look at the long listing of the
director structure. So, we have learned it
earlier and if you put uh uh -l option to
the ls command then you will see the long
listing.
So, here is the typical output of the ls -l
command and you would see that there is this
output which is given for uh as an example.
So, the very first character uh tells you
what type of file it is. So, the d will say
that it is a director that we are talking
about. And then there are nine characters
which would be rwx with any of the three positions
replaced with the hyphen in case that particular
permission is not available.
The first three characters refer to the permissions
of the owner. The second set of three characters
are permissions of the group the third set
of characters are for the others that is any
other user in the particular Linux system
whoever is logged on can be considered as
part of the others group. And then the number
after that corresponds to the number of hard
links what do we mean by a hard link?
We will come to in a moment and then there
are two names that are given here the first
name correspond to the owner. So, who is owning
this particular entry documents that owner
is displayed here the second entry is for
the group. So, sometimes you may want to have
the ownership of any folder to be a group
to which your part. So, that a set of users
can collaborate to work on a particular directory
together.
So, you should understand that Unix or Linux
come from a time when uh uh multiple users
are locked down to a mainframe computer and
are sharing files and working hard collaboratively
and therefore the file system has these features
built in already. uh By default there is always
a group by the same name as the user and and
therefore such folders are basically uh private
to particular user.
Then this number here corresponds to the size
in terms of bytes how much size is occupied
by that particular folder. And then come the
time stamp. So, when was the last time it
was modified this directory was modified uh
that is given as a time stamp uh and in in
the case the year is different the year also
would be appearing here. And then lastly the
name of the file is given. So, we will now
dissect and look at each of these possibilities
in detail.
So, in the very first character if you see
a hyphen it means that it is a regular file.
Regular file as in it could be a script it
could be a text file it could be an executable
and so on. So, what we normally refer to as
a file is what it is if there is a hyphen
in the very first entry of the long listing
of the directory structure. Now if the first
character happens to be d it means it is a
directory.
So, under that there will be other files or
other territories usually most of our work
in the Linux command line environment would
be restricted to only these two types of files
most of the time. Now the third character
that you would be alerted is about the l which
is a symbolic link we have already seen that
once, c indicate that it is a character file
and b indicates is a block file.
So, block file and character files are typically
devices. So, the character file would be the
terminal typically and the block file would
be the hard disk and we normally do not mess
around with those files unless we know what
we are doing. If the first character happens
to be s that means it is a socket file that
means it is actually a process that is actually
running behind you can have two way communication
with that particular file which means that
a network device would open a socket and listen
to the incoming connection.
And we will also be able to send out the data
a two way communication is possible and it
would be actually a process that is doing
this activity behind it is not actually a
static file and this is indicated by the character
s in the first position of the long listing
of the directory structure. If the first character
happens to be p it means it is a named pipe
that means there is a process behind which
is acting to communicate and it would be a
one way communication and you could actually
see that you cannot send the data but you
could actually read the data that is output
by that particular process.
So, whenever you see any direct listing if
the first character happens to be a hyphen
or a d that means it is in a familiar directory
as what we are normally used to. If the first
character happens to be c or b or s or p then
you should be careful with such files because
you should know what you are doing when you
try to modify those files.
Now to understand what is a hard link we need
to know what is an inode. So, you can actually
find out the inode numbers for every file
entry by using the option -i when we are running
the ls commander normally in Linux and Unix
environments whenever we need to give as an
argument that argument is listed in the text
as this manner with the the angular brackets
and some entry there.
So, it is an indication that you need to provide
something there as an input uh it is not as
if you have to actually use angular brackets
it is just a placeholder for the argument
that you are going to give. So, I will illustrate
that with the comment line uh just a moment.
So, inode it is actually an entry in the file
system table about the location in the storage
medium and it will be unique for every unique
file.
So, if there are multiple entries in the file
system that has the same ignored it means
that they are on hard links.
Now a little bit details about the permission
string also before we go to the comment line.
So, the permissions can be changed but the
way we understand the permission strings are
the first character r indicates that you have
the read permission the second character if
it is w it means that you can write to that
particular file and x indicates that it can
have executable permission.
And if the file happens to be a directory
then x would mean that you can change to the
directory ok and the first three characters
are meant for the owner the second set of
three characters are meant for the group the
third set of three characters are meant for
the others. Now there is a numerical way that
you can also represent this particular permission
string and here I am writing it as 755.
Why I am doing that is because the three characters
can be represented as on and off switches
in binary format. So, you would have one here
two here and then a four here. So, if you
take four it means you are giving read permission
if you are writing five that means you are
giving read and executable permission and
if you are giving seven you are giving all
three permissions.
So, the details are here typical permissions
that you set are indicated by these numbers
here from 1 to 7 and the permission string
that is written here is indicated by 755.
We would use this a numerical value when we
are changing the permission.
Let us try to explore the permissions how
to change them and the ability to create files
delete them moving them around, organizing
them into folder etcetera in this brief exercise.
So, we opened the terminal emulator and the
bash shell is running responding to our commands.
So, where are we now we are in the home directly.
Now when I press ls -l we see the long format
and we see that there are a bunch of folders
here.
What permissions do I have for my home directory?
To know that I need to go one level up and
look at the permissions. So I go cd double
dot and then type ls -l and we see that for
the folder which is named after my user name
the permission string says r w x for the owner
the owner is same as my user ID and the w
says that it is having right permission which
means that I can create files or folders within
my home directory which is expected.
Also you would notice that the rest of the
permissions for the group or for others is
all empty which means that I have not given
permissions for any other user to do anything
in my home directory which is also a standard
practice. So, I now go back to my home directory
with the cd and clear the screen with control
l and let us try to create some files to see
how we are able to use this permission to
organize files.
So, let me make a directory mkdir and then
let us say level one. So, I am creating a
directory called level one let me check what
I have done just now. So, you see that there
is a new folder here level one and it is actually
a directory and there are some default permissions
that have been given okay it has some permissions
that are given for the group and for others.
So, that they are able to actually read and
change over to the directory are and x permission
are given. So, this depends upon what is called
a umask which we will come to later. Now I
want to change these permissions. So, that
they look like rest of the folders also. So,
what I would do is first I would like to knock
off the write permissions for the group. So,
I would use ch mode and then a group -w which
for the group remove the right permission
and for which file for the folder called level
one.
So, I can see whether the group permissions
have been changed. So, let us look at the
directory again and you can now see the difference
here. So, there is a w here in the second
set of permission string for the level one
folder and here you could see that that permission
has been removed using this command ch mode
group -w g -w level 1. Now let us remove the
executable permission also and for that what
I would do is ch mode and ch mode g -x level
1.
And I now need to look at the output once
more long listing of the files in this folder
and you could now see that for the group the
executable permission has also been removed
for the folder calls level 1. Now we can actually
change the permissions by using this string
where ch mode and then the first string would
be u if it is for the user or g if it is for
the group or o if it is for the others.
And then if you use plus that means give the
permission to use minus then remove the permission
after that the permission can be r r r r r
w r x whichever it is okay now what I am doing
is that others I am removing the executable
permission for the folder level 1 let us say
and let us look at the output and you would
see that here for others executable permission
was originally there but it is now removed.
Now you can actually do this one permission
at a time but as we have seen in the slides
you could actually you can give a numerical
value as an option to the ch mode command
with the argument which is the folder for
which you have changed the permissions in
such a way that in one go you can make the
permissions appear as you would like. So,
let us say I want to give the permission such
that read, write and executable are there
for the owner and no permission is there for
others are for the group.
Then I would write as ch mode 700 then level
1 okay and let us look at the output now and
you would see that all the folders are looking
with the same permission and here you can
see for the folder level 1 I have removed
permissions. So, we we know now we have created
a folder called level one using make dir and
then we have adjusted the permissions as per
our vision.
Now we can go into the folder and see what
is there, cd level one and you can see that
it is empty because we have not put anything
else in that folder. Now let us create a file
uh an empty file using the touch command.
Touch command is used actually to change the
time stamp of last modified uh uh information
about that particular file or folder. And
in case the file does not exist then it will
be created and that is one way by which you
can create empty files.
So, using the touch command we will create.
So, let us say file one okay touch file one
and let us look at the output now you would
see that there is a file there and it has
just been created and the name of the file
one. And there are some default permission
that were also given. Now we will make the
default permissions again change according
to the ch mode. So, let us say ch mode and
the letters say 700 file one and you will
see that the permissions have been modified.
So, like this we can actually adjust the permissions
of any file or folder. We have seen that we
have done it for the folder called level one
and for a file called file one. We can actually
make a copy of this file using the cp command.
Copy the file to a new name let us say new
name is file2 and now let us look at it. So,
there are two files of course both are empty
but we have made a copy of the first file
using the command the cp and then old file
name followed by the new file name the three
uh fields are separated by a blank space between
them.
Now you want to move this around. Let us say
you want to move the file to one level up
to the home directory. So, you could just
say mv that is to move file to double dot
double dot is a short name for the parent
directory. So, if you do this, what happens
is the file2 is going to go into the home
directory. Let us check if it has been done.
So, first of all the file is not available
in this particular folder.
Let us go to one level above and the check
and sure enough the file has been found in
the home directory because we have moved it
one level up from the folder called level
one. Now you apart from making a copy you
can also use the mv command uh to move the
files around and also you can mv command can
also be used to rename files. So, let us rename
the file2 as something else you can give a
new name here.
So, we can save file2a and let us look at
the listing and you can see that the file
name has been changed from file2 to file2a.
So, you can change it whichever way you like.
Now uh sometimes you may want to have a space
between two different words as a part of the
file name in which case you have to use the
quotation symbol and let us also do that here.
So, I will uh create a new file here called
let us say file1 file1 and then I change the
permission uh and then you can see that the
permissions have been changed.
And now I want to rename it to do something
else. So, I will use mv command file1 and
I want to rename it such that there is a space
between two words say file 1. Now let us see
how it looks like you can see that the file
has been renamed and there is a quotation
symbol to indicate that these two are separate
words of the same file name and there is a
space between them.
So, when we want to now change permissions
we cannot use this file name without using
the quotation symbols because then it will
have a mistake if we use it without the codes.
Because it would think that the space between
the two words is actually a field separator
for two different files how is it let us just
check this out. So, let us say I want to change
the permission ch mode and let us say 700
the same permission and let us say file1.
And you see that it is complaining say that
there are no such files however when we try
to do this way by giving a quotation symbol
then it works. And whenever a Linux command
works fine it actually does not give you any
output on the screen because the philosophy
of Unix which has been passed on to Linux
ease of nonsense namely do not throw any output
if everything worked fine.
Now let us say we want to remove this file.
So, there is a command called rm which we
can remove the files rm is a file okay rm
file1 and it is asking me whether I should
remove it or not and I say yes okay. Now normally
if you use it very first time then it does
not ask because the default behaviour is not
to ask. I have made an alias for the remove
command uh where I pass on the option -i okay.
So, let us look at the help for the command
if you see here -i option is there -i option
is there.
So, that for every removal there is a prompting
okay. So, it is a problem if you have a lot
of files to be removed if it keeps prompting
but for new bees it is a good idea to let
it be there. So, that you are careful. Now
how do you set the alais okay. So, that is
done by using a command called alias alias
rm is equal to rm space -i okay. Now the alias
actually is to make it ask every time.
If you use this command then it will ask every
time okay. So, you can try it out. So, that
you can check whether it prompts you when
you want to remove files always tried to do
these commands on empty files that you have
created using the touch comment. So, that
there is no loss of data if you tried it on
any other files that was useful for you. Now
let us go forward to explore more features.
So, let me clear the screen now. Now the file2a
is in the home directory. Now let us say I
want to move it back to the level one. So,
we could do that by using the mv command mv
file2a to level one and you see that it is
disappeared from the home directory and I
change the directory to level one and I see
the output and it is there in the level one
folder one level below.
So, we have never been able to create empty
files and move them around copy them and also
delete them uh if you do not need them. Now
one concept called hardlink is something that
we need to get familiarized just to understand
what is this number that is coming here in
this string? So, that is actually the number
of hardlinks and we mentioned about the inode
number in the context of it and we can actually
look at the inode numbers to understand what
is that.
So, look at the folder called level one it
has two hard links. So, what are those two
hard links? So, to understand that we should
get the inode number. So, I would do that
here ls -li and then you can see that there
are some additional numbers that are printed
in front of the long listing of the file system
here and for level one if you see here this
is the inode number. This is inode number
we will note it down and keep it safe to compare.
Now let us go into the level one directory
okay and let us look at the long listing with
the inode number but also with every file
that is there including the dot and double
dot okay. So, -a option is to have dot and
double dot. Now you can combine options with
one single -hyphen that is quite acceptable
okay. Now you see that the dot which is there
which is the current directory has this is
the same inode number.
You can see here same inode number as level
one here. A location for the dictory level
one has the inode number which is highlighted
here okay and also here and it has two interests
in the file system one for the directory called
level one which is in the home directory and
then there is another directory called dot
which is under the level one. So, there are
basically two hard links.
Why are we saying that there are two hard
links because they are basically having the
same inode number and there is a reason why
when you look at this number here it says
two okay. Now what would happen when uh we
look at the subdirectories uh this number
will keep increasing as the number of subdirectories
get created. So, let us look at that now.
So, in the level one I make a directory called
level two.
Now I look at the same option and I see that
the number of hard links has increased to
three. So, where is the third hard link? Well
you can understand that when you go inside
the level two and look at that the parent
directory from there is the same inode number
as the level one. So, the third inode is basically
here the double dot under the subdirectory.
So, as the number of subdirectories increases
the number of hard kinks also keeps increasing.
And one needs to basically look at this number
to understand how many different entries are
there in the file system. Now most of the
simple files regular files that are having
a dash in the front of the long listing of
the file uh we actually have only one hard
link which means that this is the only file
and if you delete this that means that particular
file has disappeared.
Now if there are more hard links it means
that if you delete one such entry there are
other entries which may still be existing
and for regular files such a possibility is
very much there and we will come to the use
of that in backup systems at a later point
of time. For now let us now go back to the
home directory and as we have discussed earlier
tilde is a alias for the home director I can
just press tilde and go to the home directory.
So, where am I? I am in the home directory.
I can actually now go back to the same directory
with a dash and we will go back to the level
two directory again. So, the dash is a um
alias for the previous directory that we were
using and tilde is alias for the home directory
that we started from. And now I clear the
screen with control l. So, till now we have
been seeing where we have permissions namely
in the home directory and where we were able
to create files and also do some uh reorganization
of files.
Now let us see whether uh we get errors when
we try to do that in a folder where we are
not supposed to try that out. So, let us go
to the system folder do not be afraid you
can just try it out and then see how the system
is actually preventing you from doing any
damage to the operated system inadvertently.
So, let me go to the root folder where am
I? I am in the root folder.
And you see that this particular folder everything
is owned by root you can see that it is everything
is owned by a root. Now who am I am actually
a different user I am not the root user who
am I? You can see that the user name is printed
there. So, the user name is not matching the
owner here and therefore this folder for example
I cannot do much. So, let us try to create
an empty file in this folder by let us say
you know file1 and you see that there is an
error that comes permission denied because
we do not have write permission.
And how do I know that ls -la and for the
current directory which is root directory
there are no write permissions for others
and my user name is not matching the root
therefore I am other uh user and therefore
I do not have a right permission. So, I cannot
create a file in this particular folder. So,
that is how the denial happens for the creation
of files. Now even for accessing the folders
also there could be permission denials and
we will explore that in the var folder.
So, let us go to the var folder and then to
the log folder and this is a place where the
access logs system logs etc are all kept.
So, here you see that most of the files are
owned by root are syslog process and in a
different group etcetera. So, here there are
many files which are actually not owned there
are many files which do not have a read permission
for others and in this case we are other users
who we do not have read permission.
So, syslog we do not have read permission
let us scroll up and see with the mouse button
I scroll up and see whether I have a root
read permission in any other files. So, I
have a file here alternatives dot log in which
the others will have a read permission. So,
let us go ahead and see whether we can read
it okay. So, what we do is there is a command
called less which actually allows you to read
a text file page by page and at the end of
the content you can actually come out of it
by pressing q.
And we are using bash. So, we could actually
type a few characters of a file name and press
tab and it will fill the file name for you.
So, you do not have to type the entire file
name accurately. Now I just press here and
you can see some output that is coming onto
the screen from the file alternatives dot
log and which means that I am able to read
this file and I have come to the bottom of
the page and it shows here end and I pressed
q to come out of it.
So, I have a read permission and therefore
I am able to read this file using less command.
Now let me see if I can change the permission
with the write permission. So, let us see
let us ch mode others I want to give write
permission for this file. I am another user.
So, I want to give a write permission and
you see that it is denied. Why is it denied
because when we go and scroll up and see it
here it is owned by root okay only root can
change the permissions of files owned by root.
So, anybody can change permissions of a file
only when their owners of that particular
file. So, here the ownership is given to the
root and that is one of the safety mechanisms
by which an ordinary user cannot actually
change permissions to do any modifications
to that particular file however read permissions
are given. Now there are some files for which
read permissions are not given.
So, let us see if we can actually read them
okay. So, let us say less and ubuntu advantage
dot log okay I want to read this file here
you see this okay there is a log file which
the permissions are not available and I want
to try and read it and you can see that it
does not get through because the breed permissions
are not there. Now this is a folder ah what
are the kind of permissions in this folder
let us see.
The folder itself the current directory does
not have any right permission for others also.
So, which means that I cannot create any folder
here either make dir level one failed ok I
cannot create folders there because this folder
is owned by root. Touch file1 I cannot create
an empty file here because the folder does
not have write permissions for others. So,
you can see that there is a mechanism in place
where we cannot actually um create files or
change permissions or create directories in
locations where they are belonging to the
system and the operating system.
And we cannot actually override those settings
unless we are super users So, how to override
it and doing something knowingly and carefully
what is required for system administration
is something that we will come to know as
we go along in this course. For now I want
to also show you one more permission that
can be denied. If you see here this particular
folder unattended upgrades unattended upgrades
you can see that there is no x permission
given for others.
Which means that I cannot even change directory
to that particular folder okay I cannot even
cd to that. So, let me try that cd unattended
and I just feel that uh with a tab character
and try it out and says permission then I
cannot even enter the directory. So, this
is how the upper system has secured itself
from ordinary users. So, that there are folders
which you cannot enter.
There are folders which you cannot write to
and there are files that you cannot read and
whatever is available to you with read permission
that is all that you can play with uh by reading
but there is nothing more that you can do.
So, naturally you do not have to worry much
as a uh novice user when you are running around
with the commands simple commands like ls
or cd or cp and such things you really cannot
do too much of any damage to operating system.
uh
And you can go ahead and explore the uh file
system hierarchy and try to read text files
wherever you find them. Now how do I know
which file which file is a text file and which
file is actually a binary file. So, for that
let me go to the user bin okay and there are
a lot of files here and I just pick up the
last one and just to see what is that file.
So, there is a command called file where it
will tell you what kind of a file that is.
So, in user bin directory the file called
znew happens to be a ASIIC text and it is
an executable string executable script okay.
So, ASIIC text means so that I can read it
on the screen. So, let me try that out and
you see that I am able to read it ok it just
opens and shows you the script. So, we will
understand the script by the end of this course.
So, do not worry for now we are able to read
it.
Now let us look at another uh such uh executable
uh whether it is a script or is it a binary
file let us look at that. Now it appears that
the last file zoom is a symbolic link to something
else okay. Now let us go there and see what
it is. So, zoom launcher happens to be here
and you see that it now gives a different
kind of an output it says it is an ELF 64
bit okay LSB shared object for the architecture
X86-64 and so on.
This actually means that this is a binary
file okay we cannot read it. So, let us try
if it is possible and what happens and you
see that it is alerting you saying that this
is a binary file. So, do you want to really
see it? We will say no because it will actually
appear in a garbled manner on a text uh screen
and therefore we will not attempt that. So,
you can see that you can actually find out
what type of a file it is by using the file
command and try it also on the directory.
File zoom and it says it is a directory go
one level up file opt it says it is a directory
come to home directory try it on come to home
there try it on level one and it says it is
a directory. Go to that level one try it on
file1 and it says it is an empty file. So,
you can see that you can actually find out
what type of file it is and whether it is
a directory or a regular file is a text file
or executable binary etc using the file command.
And you can also explore uh what is there
in the system for you to read using these
commands. Now let us spend a few minutes about
the time stamp also. So, the time stamps at
this moment is given by the comment date and
if you look at the directories some of them
are actually quite old because they have been
modified long back. So, if you look at the
desktop folder for example it is modified
uh on July 28th it says.
Now I want to change the time stamp. So, I
could do the one thing I can just use touch
command and then I can run ls -l again and
you now see that that time stamp has changed
you can see here that time stamp is 25th November
1650 and before the touch it is actually July
28th 2020. So, what it implies is that this
file desktop folder uh was having a time stamp
which was old and and the command touch desktop
has changed the last modified time stamp to
the current time stamp.
So, that is how they uh time stamp has been
changed. So, the command attached can actually
make some of the files uh look like they are
new or newly edited. And if you give a file
name which does not exist then the touch command
will actually create that file as an empty
file and show it to you. So, let us try that
out. So, you can see that I have just touched
a file called xaa and there is no such file.
And what it does is it does not complain it
just goes on to create an empty file with
the latest time stamp and then shows that
as a file in the uh list of files and then
we have it as a part of the files in the home
directory.
So, we have seen in this session some important
commands which are very useful for a day to
day operation such as ch mode to change the
permissions of a file of course ls -l shows
you what are those permissions and then ch
mode allows you to change those and touch
command is there to create empty files or
to change the timestamp of any file, cp is
to create a copy of a file, mv is to rename
or relocate a file, mkdir is to create directories
and rm is used to remove a file.